# Introduction

*Sections:*
* Introduction
* Languages
* Syntax/Thinking
* Compilers
* Libraries
* Setup


## Introduction
Yay! You made it to the first lesson!
This lesson is that obligatory kinda unimportant and boring lesson that covers the various overview stuff that you sorta knew at the back of your head. I'll try to keep things brief, and you definitely don't have to memorise the stuff in here, but it is generally important that you have a rough idea of this stuff.

So, what actually *is* a program?
A program is a series of very specific instructions for a computer to carry out, one at a time.


## Languages
So great. A program is a series of instructions. But how do you give the computer those instructions? Well, you've got to give it the instructions in a way it can understand.

A programming language sets out well-defined ways for people to write the instructions in a way that the computer can understand them. They have a set-of well defined syntax and also some useful features to make your life easier.

Different languages are used for different things (hard to beleive, I know). Some common ones are:
 * Java - for making desktop applications
 * Python - for making special desktop applications (aka Java for hipsters)
 * HTML/CSS/javascript - several languages that sorta merge together to make websites
 * C++ - Java but faster, at the expense of making the programmer manage more things
 * PHP - backend website stuff i.e. doing server-side processing things
 
 Most languages share common ideas, but with slight differences and extra features.
 All the ideas taught in this guide are shared throughout common desktop programming langagues, such as Java, Python or C++, and they're also applicable in some of the other languages like javascript.

For example, both Python and Java let you send messages to the console. In Java this is
```System.out.println("The Message");```
While in python it is
```print("The Message")```

Although their are slight differences, the central idea of sending a message to the console is present in both. It is only the syntax that has changed.
 
 > Note: While we're on the subject their is a big difference between *java* and *javascript*. Java is a programming language for running programs on your computer, such as Minecraft. Javascript is a website thing and allows websites to do dynamic things, like facebook letting you click on pictures and Gmail letting you open emails and stuff (without reloading the page)

 
 ## Syntax / Thinking programmaticaly
 So on the surface, initally programming can seem to be about syntax. Syntax is how you write the instructions, and initially learning to program will mean learning how to talk to the computer - i.e. how to syntax.
 
 However, syntax isn't really programming. Programming is about thinking logically about solving problems, and the tasks needed to do so. We'll cover this more in Algorithims, but esentially most of programming is:
 ``` I want computer to do x.
 What steps do I tell the computer to do such that it does x?```
 
 It's important to learn how to think programmaticaly, solving problems logically. The activiteis at the bottom of the page should try to do this, so it's important that you do them!

 
 ## Compilers
 So ultimately computers just work with electrical currents representing 0s and 1s. How do your instructions, written in semi-english, end up giving these low-level instructions?
 
 Well, programs get compiled. Compilers are programers which convert your human-readable code into bytecode, that a machine can use and execute.
 
Java and C++ are both high-level compiled languages.

> Note: Some other languages, like python, are interpreted. This means that an intrepreter reads the code line by line and decides what to do then. This runs a bit slower, but does have some other (mystical) benefits.


## Libraries
Libraries are bits of code other people have published that do useful things for you.
For example, one common library is unirest. Unirest manages making API calls to websites. I've used unirest for the TBA scraper. I don't have to worry about knowing how to make internet calls getting data - I just use the Unirest library, and let it take care of that for me.
Some common libraries we use are WPILib (does code for robot motors and stuff, published by FIRST), Arachne (our own library that makes WPILib easier to use) and OpenCV (computer vision stuff).


## Setup
TODO.